This study represents the largest meta-analysis and meta-regression on postpartum depression prevalence in the literature to date. We found that the unadjusted global prevalence rate of PPD in studies utilizing the EPDS scale is 19.18% (95% CI: 18.02 to 20.34%). Adjusting for the recommended EPDS cutoffs yielded a prevalence of 19.9% for possible PPD (>10) and 18.28% for probable PPD (>13). These estimates are slightly higher than the previous calculation by Hahn-Holbrook et al., which found a global PPD prevalence of 17.7% (95% CI: 16.6–18.8%). One explanation for this discrepancy is that the current study adds new data with a higher proportion of studies from relatively low- and middle-income countries, that tend to report higher rates of PPD. Between South Africa, which has the highest PPD prevalence rate (44%), and Singapore, which has the lowest PPD prevalence rate, there is a 41% difference. Considering there are many low-income countries missing from this analysis, it is plausible that global PPD is even more prevalent than our findings suggest. While several methodological variables predicted cross-national variation in PPD, specifically the timing of assessment and EPDS cutoff used, the strongest individual predictor in this study was SSB consumption.
Our meta-regression revealed that SSB consumption predicted PPD prevalence both between-countries and within-countries. Specifically, countries that consumed more SSBs, on average, had higher rates of PPD prevalence. This finding alone could be attributed to other cultural differences that co-vary with SSB consumption, although this effect was still significant when methodological factors and GDP were included in the model. However, we also found that, within the same country, in years with higher SSB consumption, studies tended to report higher rates of PPD in that country. This within-country finding lends credence to the hypothesis that it is SSB consumption, and not some other cultural factor, that contributes to higher rates of PPD.
The current study did not find a statistically significant association between seafood consumption and cross-national PPD prevalence, contradicting a previous report by Hibbeln and colleagues. Specifically, the previous study correlated DHA in the milk of breastfeeding mothers to PPD rates by country (N = 23), and found that countries that consumed more seafood tended to have lower rates of PPD prevalence. There are several possible reasons for the discrepancy between our current findings and this previous report. For example, the current study examines twice the number of countries (N = 46) and includes countries with more diverse economic conditions. Additionally, the current study used meta-regression which weighted countries and studies, and controlled for methodological variables and GDP, while Hibbeln did not control for these confounding variables. Although our findings were not significant, the effect we found was in the same direction as Hibbeln. Additionally, Hibbeln was published over two decades ago, and it is possible that breastfeeding women were not discouraged from consuming certain seafood in the same way they are now due to concerns surrounding mercury poisoning. Future directions focusing on PPD and seafood consumption, particularly seafood high in omega-3 fatty acids, is warranted. In addition to seafood consumption, we found no relationships between fiber, yogurt, fruit, and vegetable consumption and national PPD prevalence. Despite these null results at the cross-national level, we encourage researchers to continue to examine the relationship between these dietary factors and PPD.
Our results have several important implications for research and policy to prevent PPD. For example, our research suggests that policies that help reduce SSB consumption may help reduce PPD prevalence. There are several existing policies shown to reduce SSB consumption at the national and regional level. For example, implementing a “sugar tax” at the national level disincentivizes the consumer from purchasing SSB by increasing the overall price. Therefore, causing a loss in SSB revenues and encouraging SSB companies to reduce the sugar in their product so that it does not qualify as a high-sugar product. In addition, the extra tax revenue from this strategy can then be used to offset the health care costs associated with sugar-related disease. Currently, 45 countries in the world have some type of sugar tax, however, in the US, sugar taxes are in place in only a few cities. Due to the availability of cross-national and within-country sugar consumption data, future research could explore whether implementing sugar taxes changes national rates of depression. While a sugar tax is a good start, more aggressive policies and behavioral health campaigns focusing on limiting SSB consumption may also be necessary. For example, interventions could focus on limiting the consumption of common ingredients in most SSBs. In the last 50 years, the use of high fructose corn syrup has increased dramatically, largely due to the fact that it is inexpensive and manufacturing friendly. National and local policies to reduce the use of high fructose corn syrup may be a viable step to improve maternal mental health. However, all types of added sugar are low in nutrient density, and high fructose corn syrup is just one factor in a massive global issue. Therefore, while focusing on types of added sugars in policymaking may lead to some health improvement, reducing consumption of all sugar types would be most impactful.
In addition to gaining a deeper understanding of the impact caused by different types of sweeteners, future work on this topic should focus on identifying additional cultural factors that may further explain variance in national PPD prevalence. For example, environmental and lifestyle factors such as exercise, obesity, partner support, and mindfulness practices, which have been linked to PPD, in individual studies might also be linked to PPD on the national level. Future research could also focus on micronutrients, such as vitamin D, that previous research have shown play an important role in mental health.
Although this study had several strengths, including the large number of studies representing populations with varied lifestyles, economic backgrounds, and diets, our results should be considered alongside several important limitations. First, our study focused on a widely used self-report PPD measure instead of clinical interviews. Self-report PPD measures tend to yield higher estimates than clinical interviews, and therefore, the estimates in this study are likely higher than if we had used studies that conducted interview-based methods. However, given that interview methods are less common than self-report measures, especially in low-income countries, we felt that it was important to utilize a more representative measure. We also felt that potentially overestimating PPD would be safer than underestimating PPD, given its detrimental consequences. We use is nationally representative, and some countries estimates are much more reliable than others. We urge readers to consider the 95% confidence intervals when considering our national PPD prevalence estimates. More research reporting PPD prevalence is essential for providing more accurate prevalence estimates that. Secondly, collecting accurate nutrition data is notoriously challenging. This is why we used the Global Dietary Database, which has the most comprehensive empirical data on dietary intake across and within nations. Even so, it is difficult to identify inaccuracies within it. Thirdly, when using aggregate data, it is important to remember the ecological fallacy- that analyses based on area-level averages can yield very different conclusions than those that would be obtained from an analysis at the individual level.
