Emergence of recurrent epidemic waves of COVID-19 is a systemic phenomenon and its quantitative understanding remains an elusive target. Typically, several interacting factors contribute to recurrent dynamics. Firstly, the population structure in the modern world is highly heterogeneous: not only at the level of individual households and local government areas, but also at the regional, national and international level. This heterogeneity forces the infection transmission to follow complex paths, producing distinct urban and rural waves, disproportionate effects on high- and low-density housing, as well as in the areas characterised by socioeconomic disadvantage profiles and higher concentrations of essential workers. Thus, while infection rates may decline in some areas, they may escalate in others.
Secondly, the population compliance with various stay-at-home orders and adoption of social distancing requirements fluctuates in time: strong initial adherence is typically replaced by sizable fatigue and rarely recovers beyond moderate compliance, thus reducing effectiveness of NPIs. This fatigue cannot be exclusively attributed to “contrarian” individuals and affects broad population groups.
Thirdly, vaccine efficacy wanes over time, requiring booster vaccine doses, which temporarily reestablish protective immunity. Independently, following a typically strong initial vaccination uptake, “the fully up to date” vaccinated population fraction slowly reduces over time, undergoing possible upswings when the risk perception increases. Similar to the NPI fatigue, this dynamic is driven not only by “anti-vaxxer” groups, but may depend on access to and knowledge about vaccination, and involve several drivers of vaccine hesitancy, including confidence, complacency, altered risk calculation, and limited collective responsibility.
In addition, the testing, tracing, isolation and quarantine (TTIQ) capacities themselves may be under stress during rapidly growing outbreaks, diminishing their role in curbing the epidemic. The TTIQ capacities were severely strained in Australia during the rise of the Omicron variant, leading to a decline in their effectiveness. Moreover, delays in imposing strict NPIs or initiating vaccination rollouts amplify non-linearly, so that short response lags cause long recovery tails. All these cyclical spatiotemporal dynamics may combine over time, creating vicious feedback loops and superposition of interacting waves.
In this study, we sought to increase our understanding of the mechanisms generating multiple pandemic waves. We specifically modelled a pandemic response to the emergence and spread of highly transmissible variant of SARS-CoV-2 (Omicron and its sub-lineages) during the fourth pandemic stage in Australia. This stage produced several local incidence peaks, and we identified the corresponding phases (see Fig 1), followed by retrospective modelling of dynamic social distancing behaviour.
Importantly, the identification of distinct phases did not reduce the analysis to a description of well-defined waves, but rather attributed the incidence peaks and patterns to nuanced combinations of new sub-variants and fluctuations in social distancing behaviour. For example, the secondary peak in mid-April of 2022 (see phase 6 in Fig 1) was explained not only by the emergence of BA.2 which started to dominate the preceding BA.1, but also by the reduced adoption of social distancing requirements.
The main result of this modelling is that the fraction of SD-adopters was found to be fluctuating in response to the incidence dynamics. Essentially, these changes appeared in response to the pandemic dynamics observed by the population, sometimes lagging behind and occasionally preempting pandemic turns.
Using the actual incidence data and simulated scenarios which varied the extent of SD-adoption across time, we “retrodictively” determined the dynamically fluctuating SD-adoption profile that produced the incidence curves matching the observations. The resultant incidence curves were further contrasted with the curves produced by alternative scenarios defined by static SD-adoption. The comparison clearly demonstrated that, unlike the dynamic SD-adoption, the static alternatives failed to reproduce key non-linear features of the incidence trajectories. This indicated that the fraction of individuals adopting (or complying with) social distancing requirements may greatly vary over time, especially during a long pandemic. Hence, public health policies must adequately account for this variability, acknowledging and addressing possible fatigue and complacency within the population. Timely, rapidly designed and focused communication campaigns may be needed to reinforce the importance of continuing social distancing in controlling persistent spread and reducing the public health burden.
The study also suggested, albeit indirectly, that the increased incidence observed during the last wave induced by sub-variants BA.4 and BA.5 (Fig 1: phase 7) was mostly driven by reinfections or new infections in vaccinated individuals with low or waning vaccine effectiveness, rather than new infections of the epidemiologically or immunologically “naïve” population. Testing for antibodies in Australia between 9 and 18 June 2022 provided an indication of the extent of cumulative exposure in the community to vaccination and/or natural infection: the prevalence of anti-spike antibodies, elicited by both vaccination and natural infection, was found to be very high (99%) across all jurisdictions, while the prevalence of anti-nucleocapsid antibodies, elicited by natural infection, reached 46%. The finding of our study, which emphasised re-infections and low or diminishing vaccine efficacy as key factors during phase 7, pointed to the need for agile “booster” vaccination campaigns, to raise immunity levels within the population during protracted pandemic stages.
We estimated the corresponding disease burden (the hospitalisations, ICU occupancy, and daily and cumulative deaths), and compared it with the actual data. A good agreement between the simulated and actual disease burden data reinforced the point that the observed nonlinear dynamics are produced not simply by transitions across sub-variants of Omicron, but also in response to varying adoption of social distancing behaviour. The analysis also quantified and emphasised indirect effects of COVID-19 on the disease burden in Australia, differentiating between ICU cases directly attributable to COVID-19 versus those occurring with COVID-19. This distinction highlighted the need for a precise attribution of underlying conditions associated with ICU admissions during a long pandemic.
Several limitations of the study have to be acknowledged. Firstly, the simulated population was generated using the latest available Australian Census data from 2016 (23.4M individuals) and may not be precisely representative of 2021–2022 period of time. However, the generated curves were scaled by 10% to reflect the current Australian population (25.8M). Secondly, the ABM does not simulate transmissions within healthcare facilities. However, health care professionals were vaccinated over several priority phases carried out in Australia in 2021 and 2022 and mask mandates were in place in health care facilities in these time periods, reducing the effect of this limitation. Furthermore, while vaccine efficacy is known to diminish over time, we did not model this explicitly, and considered this effect to be balanced by third vaccination doses administered in Australia during the studied period (e.g., 71.6% of Australian adults had received 3 doses by August 2022). In contrast to the greatly fluctuating SD-adoption, a decline in the vaccine efficacy is known to be monotonic, while our focus was on modelling multiple peaks of distinct waves within a single pandemic stage.
In conclusion, the understanding of the impact of the Omicron variant on the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be refined, and our results may benefit from additional analysis of the latest Omicron sub-variants. Nevertheless, the quantitative retrospective modelling presented in this study highlighted the impact of fluctuating social distancing behaviour on the resultant pandemic dynamics, revealing nuanced reasons for persistence of the Omicron variant in Australia. The developed model, validated with actual data from the Omicron stage in Australia, captures multiple dynamic factors which non-linearly affect the pandemic spread, and hence, can be used to evaluate and contribute to agile, adaptive and multi-faceted public health responses in the future.
