Seventeen participants (68%) performed better in the WN condition, 6 (24%) showed the same performance, and only 2 (8%) performed worst with noise. These results suggest that WN improves WM by some means although there was no statistical difference between the NAN and AN condition on CI.
This finding may be explained by the physical phenomenon, the Stochastic Resonance (SR). In neuroscience, the term SR has been used to describe a phenomenon in which a very weak signal can be reinforced by the addition of WN. The WN frequencies, corresponding to the frequencies of the original signal, would resonate with each other and amplify the original signal without amplifying the rest of the WN, which results in an increase in the S/N ratio and makes the original sign more prominent. SR concept was first used by Pawel Jastreboff as one of the factors that leads to habituation of symptoms in tinnitus retraining therapy. However, use the SR to explain the positive influence of WN on the performance of WM tests in our study, from an acoustical point of view, seems insufficient.
Schilling et al. (2021) hypothesized that SR regulates neural activity based on the well-known residual-inhibition phenomenon. The presence of external noise reduces neural activity, resulting in a decline in the perception of tinnitus. SR may explain how the brain processes inputs in noisy environments from individual synapses and single neurons to complete neural networks. Applying this reasoning model, it can be hypothesized that external WN stimuli may reduce neural activity, suppress tinnitus awareness, and free up additional cognitive resources for high WM task performance.
However, the effects of WN on WM remain unclear. There is no consensus in the literature, perhaps because of the variety of approaches used for these measurements. Although noise has often been considered a blurring factor for standard activeness, recent theoretical and experimental studies have shown a plausible constructive role, since it can improve neuronal firing steadiness and constancy in single and cluster neurons. Othman et al. (2019) studied the influence of WN on low WM in normal hearing. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was used to understand how neural networks act while performing different S/N tasks. They observed a significant improvement, revealed by greater frontal, primary auditory, and anterior cingulate cortex activation in all noise conditions, except for the 0 dB S/N ratio. They concluded that the optimal S/N ratio to improve WM performance was between +10 and +5 dB. In our study, the most frequent S/N ratios among participants with better performance on noise WMAB were +30 and +15 dB, suggesting that tinnitus patients may need a higher S/N ratio to achieve SR benefits.
The MoCA test revealed that 48% of the participants had mild cognitive impairment and 20% showed low WM capacity (performance less than 3 spans). Lee et al. (2020) studied MoCA-K (Korean version) in 58 participants aged >65 years and observed that 17.2% performed less than normal. They established a relationship between a THI ≥ 30 and low MoCA-K rating and hypothesized that tinnitus can negatively affect attentional orientation and executive control and reduce cognitive processing speed. The exact physiopathology underlying these findings has yet to be fully elucidated. In the present study, four patients aged ≥ 65 years had lower MoCA performance. However, we did not find any relationship between this and THI scores, perhaps due to the small sample size.
Psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and depression are prevalent in chronic tinnitus patients. Mild-to-moderate to severe depressive symptoms were observed in 52% of our sample, and anxiety symptoms were observed in 20%. A recent United States study of 21.4 million adults with tinnitus reported a prevalence of 25.6% of depression symptoms and 26.1% of anxiety symptoms. The difference between our study and the literature may be attributed to sample size.
A great variability in results was observed in the HFA; 44% of participants aged 51 years or older showed lower auditory thresholds. These findings are similar to those of Vielsmeier et al. (2015), who observed HFA impairment among older adults, perhaps because of the greater sensitivity in detecting such changes. They also noticed a strong association between the worst thresholds in HFA and tinnitus laterality, which was not observed in the present study. A possible explanation is that 48% of our HFA auditory thresholds were close to normal compared to 17% of those in the aforementioned study. Four participants in our study had a complete lack of auditory perception bilaterally for HFA and poor performance on the WMAB; these data are similar to those reported by Waechter et al. (2019), who linked cognitive performance to the absence of auditory thresholds for HFA. A possible explanation may be the finding of Melcher et al. (2013), who related a lower amount of gray matter (in the subcallosal area) to lower auditory thresholds for HFA. As the subcallosal area manages attentional processes, less grey matter may imply lower complex cognitive task performance. Patients with tinnitus may experience cognitive decline due to auditory threshold deterioration for HFA or due to the symptom itself, in which awareness can be more intrusive and bothersome for some participants.
In general, our findings regarding WM function are in agreement with part of the literature that reports a negative influence of tinnitus, which seems to increase cognitive load and decrease residual ability on task performance. Thus, during a WM task, voluntary effort is required for consciousness and control and fewer cognitive resources are required for good performance. There is still no consensus on a WM gold standard test. Clinical trials do not seem to control bias variables such as age, sex, hearing loss, education, fatigue, depression and anxiety symptoms, sleep pattern, and emotional motivation.
Our study revealed a relationship between higher THI scores and worse WMAB performance; however, since our sample was small and statistical significance was observed only in the mean analysis, this finding should be considered with caution. The data disagree with Nagaraj et al. (2020), who did not show any correlation between the THI and high WM test responses. The authors suggested that their findings could not be generalized as the sample size studied was not significant. No similar studies have evaluated the effect of WN on high WM tests among participants with chronic tinnitus and normal hearing.
This study has limitations because the sample showed great variability in terms of age, cognition, and years of education. The presence of the control group could have contributed to a better understanding of the influence of white noise. However, such a group should be matched exactly with age, cognitive level, and education to avoid any bias. In addition, we cannot overlook the possible influence of personal motivation. during the test performance.
