This cases series shows that MAL resection associated with stenting seems to be a safe procedure in trained hands for patients with DS. Laparoscopy release of the MAL is now the standard procedure but may require a conversion in case of a massive supraceliac bleeding. The only patient operated with a median laparotomy required a duodenal switch in the context of complications that arose from gastroduodenal bleeding following endoscopy, which was associated with celiac hypertension caused by the MAL. MAL release was performed during the same procedure and this is the reason why open access was preferred. In all other patients, a laparoscopic approach was followed with no conversion. In the literature, a conversion rate of 9.1% was reported by Jimenez et al. on a series review of 400 patients between 1963 and 2012 in the English language. This high rate may be related to the learning curve of this rare procedure. The difference between the conversion rate in the literature and that in the present study could be explained by the fact that all patients were operated upon by the same hepatobiliary team in our cohort. To our knowledge, no such standardized procedure has been described to date.
We observed that the operative time and postoperative complications were lower in the DG than in the BG. This could be explained by increased difficulties during surgery in those in the BG because of the presence of a retroperitoneal hematoma or hemoperitoneum.
Two patients in the BG had major complications (Clavien > 3a) and needed reintervention. These complications were related to the stents. Specifically, one patient underwent a stent occlusion on postoperative day (POD) 2. The patient was asymptomatic and the stent thrombosis was diagnosed by using routine duplex ultrasound. We decided to perform a thrombo-aspiration procedure using AngioJet (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, United States). Proximal stent extension, with a covered balloon expandable stent, was performed through a percutaneous left femoral access. The follow-up was uneventful and the patient was discharged on POD 9.
The second patient underwent a CT dissection due to stent displacement with distal stent occlusion. This patient was also asymptomatic, and the aortic dissection was diagnosed by performing a CT-scan. Dissection stenting was performed on POD 5 using a covered balloon expandable stent. Because of the complexity of the first CT artery catheterization procedure, a left axillary cut down was preferred in this case.
There is no clear evidence in the literature on whether endovascular revascularization should be performed in all cases. The timing is also not well established. Cienfuegos et al. proposed an algorithm in which endovascular treatment will be provided if a patient presents with recurrence or persistence of symptoms after laparoscopic release. Their study included 13 patients with Dunbar syndrome, and all of them were operated by laparoscopy; good early results were achieved with 69.2% free from symptoms. Berard et al. and Columbo et al. also suggested percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) for patients with recurrence or persistence of symptoms. In the series of Columbo et al., 7/21 (33%) patients needed PTA because of persistent symptoms of CT stenosis. One of the largest prospective series was published by Brody et al. They treated 42 patients with a laparoscopic release of the MAL and studied the predictors of clinical outcome regarding CT velocity and SF-36 score. Interestingly, they found that age and CT expiratory velocity were significant independent predictors.
In our center, all patients who underwent MAL release were subsequently managed by a vascular surgeon. A CT angiography is performed after MAL release through femoral or left brachial access (Figure 1). A >70% stenosis was considered significant and was treated by angioplasty and stenting. Interestingly, despite MAL release and intraoperative ultrasound, 11/13 (85%) required additional CT stenting because of persistent stenosis seen on the arteriography.
Although our sample size was small, we could observe a non-significant difference between groups regarding the CCI in favor of patients who underwent elective surgery because of the low incidence of this condition. This patient group had less postoperative complications. The median length of stay is also significantly longer in patients operated in a semi-emergency situation: 16 days vs. 4 days in elective patients (p = 0.02).
To our knowledge, this is the first study comparing patients operated for Dunbar syndrome vs. GAA rupture in CT compression.
Statistical analyses are limited by the retrospective design of the study and the sample size. But only a few authors presented a series of more than 10 cases. With regard to the experience that we acquired in our center, the systematic combined approach of a laparoscopic release of MAL with stenting during the same procedure seems to be a feasible and a safe technique. In the light of these results, we propose that every patient with an incidental finding of an MAL should undergo systematic investigations. In the event of a symptomatic patient presenting with Dunbar syndrome, a possibility for an evaluation of a laparoscopic release of the MAL and stenting of TC or SMA should be examined.
