For the first time, we analyzed the active microbiota, via the metatranscriptome, of the CRC gut and found functional dependency of the microbial community on the health state of the host. We showed inherently different regulated responses of gut microbes to diverse environmental factors, depending on whether bacteria were health- or disease-associated. This work revealed distinct mechanisms by which the microbiota are modulated by and modulate the malignant state of the gut.
The gut microbiota, the “germ organ” of the host, is a unique microbial community as it develops with the host from birth. It is well known that, despite the constant interaction of the microbiota with the colonic mucosa, no general inflammation of the gut is observed day to day. The observed core functions across cohorts are in concordance with general housekeeping activities that allow microbes to coexist with the host despite their inflammatory potential. The downregulation of the pyruvate:ferredoxin/flavodoxin core subsystem indicates that the microbiome is conducting less anaerobic respiration as a whole. However, certain pathway activities that occur in the absence of oxygen are still observed and in some cases are even upregulated (see below, TME), indicating local areas of hypoxia in the more oxygen-rich CRC niche.
The stepwise accumulation of sporadic genetic lesions causing CRC has been attributed to the damaging effects of ROS. Oxidative stress response constitutes pathways that reduce ROS, such as O2− and H2O2 to protect membranes, proteins, and DNA from damage. If the damage exceeds the capacity of host DNA repair mechanisms, genetic mutations may occur. H2O2-dependent dysregulation of epithelial barrier function would facilitate microbial colonization and invasion promoting inflammation and ROS production. However, our work argues that inflammation-derived ROS appears to be only half of the picture. Several unexpected lines of evidence strongly argue that the gut microbiota is a crucial mediator of ROS levels through their ability to scavenge and reduce ROS. If the capacity of microbiota to control the level of physiological ROS (during “homeostasis”) is reduced, even temporarily over 15 to 30 years, this may facilitate the known accumulation of ROS-induced damage (genetic and epithelial barrier function) and hence onset of CRC. We infer that expression of the oxidative stress subsystem is a core housekeeping function of the microbiome. In response to enhanced ROS availability, the microbiota are to offset this by increased ROS reduction to lower ROS to physiological levels. Conversely, overinduced activity of microbial antioxidative mechanisms may lead to diminished ROS levels, also causing gut pathology through compromising epithelial barrier integrity. We propose that two modes of ROS-mediated genetic damage can occur: (i) chronic or intermittent inflammation-dependent ROS accumulation due to, e.g., inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or antibiotic treatment and (ii) inflammation-independent damage, in which compromised ROS-reducing microbiome functions lead to excess or diminished ROS. However, these modes may together form one continuous cyclic pathology; the epithelium can be compromised in an inflammation-independent manner leading to inflammation.
Osmotic pressure, which in part regulates synthesis of ectoine, a nonenzymatic antioxidant, appears to be a regulated factor that may be associated with elevated levels of chemical antioxidants in the gut. Interestingly, the major reactive species response in the CRC gut appears to be to RNS, specifically nitric oxide. This is in concordance with high levels of inflammation that occur in the cancerous gut, including elevated levels of microbial colonization, resulting in activation of host iNOS.
Iron uptake and transport by the CRC microbiota appear to be enhanced. It was shown that tumor cells accumulate iron while blocking its export, a likely cause of the deficiency common to the condition. The potential synergistic effect of elevated microbial and tumoral iron uptake could be a mechanism by which the host becomes deficient. Iron supplementation, therefore, may have adverse effects by feeding tumor growth and pathogen virulence, hence posing a greater risk of infection and further inflammation. Many cancer patients suffer from carnitine deficiency, 75% of which is derived from the diet. The observed enhanced catabolism of carnitine by microbiota in CRC may explain, at least in part, this phenomenon. Uncontrolled growth of cancerous colonocytes is underpinned by dysregulation and reprogramming of gene expression, including translation. Humans rely on dietary scavenging and the gut microbiota for their supply of Q (queuosine, 7-deazaguanosine), necessary for tRNA (Q34tRNA) to ensure translation fidelity. Elevated microbial transport of Q suggests they are assimilating queuosine at a higher level and potentially depleting the host of this vital molecule, thus decreasing the accuracy of host protein synthesis.
Our data argue for local regions of hypoxia and O2 saturation, consistent with the known architecture and metabolism of the TME and biofilms. These conditions facilitate sequential colonization of oxygen-respiring microbes in proximity to tumor blood vessels (and local areas of inflammation) and facultative and obligate anaerobes further from the O2 supply. The TME toward the blood vessels is less acidic (CO2, H+, and lactate are vented into the bloodstream) and enriched with oxygen. Further from the vasculature, the TME becomes more hypoxic and acidic. Under this O2 gradient, cancer cells become more glycolytic and release lactate and protons into the surrounding lumen, forcing anaerobes to modify their membrane structure with unsaturated fatty acids to decrease H+ permeability, a trait we observed being adopted by the microbiota (Text S1). This suggests close interaction of microbial subpopulations coinhabiting specific niches that cannot support the growth of anaerobes and aerobes simultaneously. However, under oxygen-rich conditions, anaerobes can still thrive in CRC via formation of biofilms, with obligate anaerobes being the primary colonizers, forming the inner biofilm layers, which become hypoxic following colonization of other bacteria.
The present analysis of microbial RNA-seq data revealed evidence that the CRC gut environment, compared to its healthy counterpart, is more acidic. This can be due, in part, to the altered metabolism of cancerous colonocytes, which excessively produce lactate even in the presence of oxygen, namely, aerobic glycolysis or the Warburg effect. This would acidify the gut tumor microenvironment, hence affecting metabolism of the microbiota and potentially adapting them to this pressure. Here, we showed that the CRC gut microbiota enhanced expression of glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) of the GAD-dependent acid defense mechanism. This defense is similar to other microbial acid resistance mechanisms, such as Arg- and Lys-decarboxylase systems, which produce basic compounds and consume protons, hence increasing cytoplasmic pH. E. coli strains, whether pathogenic or not, are abundant constituents of the gut microbiota, are remarkably well equipped with acid resistance mechanisms, and can cause different diseases, including infections born from contaminated acidic food.
The Lys-dependent mechanism appears to be a universal acid defense system that protects gut bacteria against acid, irrespective of the health status of the host or nature of the acid. CadA decarboxylates Lys to cadaverine, a superoxide antioxidant, which is exported from cells in exchange for extracellular lysine and thus alkalinizing the cytoplasm by consuming a proton. However, the CadA system in the non-acid-adapted microbiotas is either unresponsive to or repressed by high salinity while playing an adaptive role in response to oxidative stress in a health-dependent manner. This suggests that the Lys-dependent resistance mechanism may provide the gut microbiota with additional nonenzymatic protection against ROS in response to high acidity and hydrogen peroxide availability, while activation by the latter is health status-dependent. In contrast, both Arg-dependent systems responded differently to both acid pressures and in a health-dependent manner. Both subsystems appear to sense low pH (H+ and lactate) only if they originated from the CRC microbiome, confirming that the Arg-dependent systems are important for maintaining pH homeostasis of aerobic microbiota in CRC. It has been shown that expression of adiA is triggered only under anaerobic growth at low pH. Our data clearly showed that adiA is expressed under aerobic conditions by E. coli of gut microbiota in a pH-independent manner regardless of the health status of origin. One possible explanation could be that growth of a complex mixture of aerobic microbes reduces the level of oxygen in the medium, resulting in derepression of the E. coli AdiA system. Additionally, low pH is not required for derepression of transcription of Arg and Lys acid-dependent systems in aerobic conditions. A potential cross-communication of microbiota and/or acidification of the medium due to CO2 production (e.g., by the activity of pH-independent SpeA) may be sufficient to maintain a constitutive level of expression of these amino acid defense mechanisms in an aerobic environment in vitro. Expression of adiA appears to be also regulated by salt and oxidative pressures. Interestingly, upregulation was observed only in microbiota derived from the control samples and in response to H2O2. These data further suggest that microbiota adapt to the environment of the gut and can exhibit these inherited properties later by regulating their patterns of gene expression as part of survival strategies, perhaps through transcriptional memory. speA appears to be a broad-spectrum stress defense mechanism, at least in E. coli under aerobic conditions. However, the health status of the host also affects the ability of the SpeA-mediated mechanism to maintain pH homeostasis of the cell, supporting the view that the microbiota of the CRC and noncancerous gut are fundamentally different. Acids, salt, and reactive oxygen species trigger in vitro amino acid-dependent acid resistance mechanisms in a health-dependent manner, suggesting that these factors are features of the CRC human gut that in turn direct microbial acid tolerance, consistent with our metatranscriptome data.
The microbiota evolved numerous adaptive mechanisms by which they can exchange and expand their genetic information. One of these mechanisms includes bacteriophage infection through lysogeny facilitated by their cohabitation. We also observed that the microbiota in the cancerous gut promote HT, a prominent feature of biofilms. Furthermore, activities of two major antiviral defense mechanisms can trigger abortive infection, namely, retrons and the broad range (naive) CRISPR-Cas type III system coinciding with phage lysogeny/prophage expression in the microbiome in CRC. It is also known that bacteriophages facilitate HT, and our findings suggest this may be the case to a greater degree in the cancerous gut. Interestingly, the CRC-associated gut microbiota downregulate CRISPR-Cas type I while enhancing activity of CRISPR-Cas type III. Type I responds to previously acquired invasive mobile genetic elements (iMGEs) and can target HT. However, the type I CRISPR system is known to fail in recognition of new and mutated sequences, allowing accumulation of invader escapers like prophages. Greater uptake of extracellular DNA by the gut microbiota and higher activity of a wide range of bacteriophages in CRC would be consistent with enhanced activity of a type III CRISPR-Cas system.
CRC-associated microbiota display a higher degree of resistance to two clinically relevant antibiotics: the glycopeptide vancomycin and the β-lactam penicillin. This implies that the gut environment may be a previously unrecognized pressure selecting for certain resistance mechanisms. Vancomycin resistance can be triggered by nonantibiotic changes occurring on outer membranes. These resistances further reduce therapeutic options, particularly for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), coagulase-negative staphylococci, and other Gram-positive infections in penicillin-allergic individuals. Our data argue that bacterial competition is enhanced in CRC through production of antimicrobials, bacitracin, microcin, and fosfomycin and appears to be a primary feature of their cohabitation. Higher activity of the multiple antibiotic resistance phenotype and some efflux transporters is consistent with the CRC gut being more toxic to the microbiota.
The present work characterizes for the first time the functions and adaptative responses of the gut microbiota in colorectal cancer. As ROS are a primary trigger of CRC development, the ability of the microbiota to modulate ROS levels in the gut poses some important questions. For example, what are the environmental signals that can regulate microbial antioxidative activities: e.g., diet, antibiotics, toxins, or other pressures? Another important task is to characterize the specific pressure(s) that promote the enhanced antibiotic resistance phenotype displayed during disease. This is critical for patients who require surgery to prevent postoperative infection. Understanding and subsequently manipulating such adaptive mechanisms that the microbiota uses to compete for nutrients, exchange genetic material, and control prevalence and activity of other gut species can be a useful tool in developing bacteria-based therapy.
This work provides direct links between specific adaptive responses of the gut microbiome in the colorectal cancer gut via metatranscriptomics. Our findings reveal important insights into the protective role of gut microbiome against developing cancer and its adaptive responses to the tumor environment. A striking example is the high background level of microbial-mediated ROS reduction activities in both CRC and healthy gut microbiomes, an apparent “core housekeeping” role of the gut community, protecting colonocytes against ROS-induced DNA damage and promoting epithelial integrity. Our data show that the CRC and control gut microbiota adapt through inherently different mechanisms to environmental pressures of the gut in vitro. This shows that the health status of the microbiota host controls microbial adaptation to specific stresses, laying the foundation for investigation into effective strategies for microbial manipulation. Depletion of the gut for beneficial metabolites in combination with enhanced genetic exchange, virulence, host colonization, and antibiotic and acid resistance in colorectal cancer make the microbiome more pathogenic and less protective.
