A number of factors exist that influence SDM output, including sampling bias, choice of environmental predictors, modeling algorithm, and other user-specified inputs (Araújo et al.,; Valavi et al.,). In this study, we updated previously published RF models of D. variabilis and D. variabilis infected with R. montanensis. This update was made possible by the addition of surveillance and testing data to the original dataset used. We thus explored what impact the additional data had on predictions found previously, through modeling both datasets and comparing predicted suitability with a niche overlap metric, Warren's I, and presenting the mapped output of modeled predictions using the original and updated datasets. We additionally presented a visualization of agreement, highlighting areas of over and underprediction of the infected niche by the overall niche prediction.
Models made with both datasets were generally high performing, and overlap indices showed that suitability predictions changed only slightly with the inclusion of novel surveillance data. The estimated range of D. variabilis primarily extends throughout the eastern United States, with the highest predicted probabilities spanning areas in the Midwest, Mid-Atlantic, and Northeast regions. The southern boundary of D. variabilis occurrence was not well captured in Lippi et al., owing to limited data points from this region in the original MilTICK dataset. Although records of ticks from southern locations (e.g., Texas and peninsular Florida) exist in online repositories, these records were not included in efforts to directly compare distributions of ticks of known infection status. Notably, the predicted geographic distribution for D. variabilis extends further South in the updated model, indicated by higher probabilities of suitability in Texas and Florida.
The updated model set showed similar patterns of variable importance, with the overall tick distribution having higher importance on variables capturing the climatic variability, than the constrained infected niche, in several variables. There were no striking shifts in these patterns, and the relative weightings were quite consistent, but it is notable that the role of “seasonality” as captured by Bioclim variables was more important for updated ticks when it was precipitation, and more important for the updated infected ticks, when it was temperature. This points to the interesting roles of the components of climate in shaping the niche for these vectors.
The predicted suitability distribution of D. variabilis infected with R. montanensis, or infected niche, is geographically constrained, compared with the full predicted suitability distribution of D. variabilis, regardless of data inputs. Areas of range disagreement, highlighted by the difference map, are most prominent along the southern and western peripheries of the full D. variabilis range in the eastern United States, as well as on the west coast. A potential explanation for this kind of pattern is that in the more established parts of the range—that is, the more central parts of predicted range—there may be higher R. montanensis exposure risk. For different tick-borne pathogens, and even for different species of ticks, evidence of patterns of expansion by both the vector and the pathogen, together or temporally lagged have varied (Burrows et al.,; Dahlgren et al.,; Fornadel et al.,). This highlights the limitations inherent in using vector distribution maps as proxies for transmission risk maps directly; incorporating pathogen testing results into this type of distribution modeling can help constrain the area most likely to be important for disease transmission exposure risk.
This is particularly germane for a generalist vector such as D. variabilis, where the presence of the pathogen in question may be patchily distributed. Disagreement among model outputs along the West coast may also be influenced by the inclusion of D. variabilis records from California, Oregon, and Washington. The western population of D. variabilis has recently been proposed as a new species (D. similis), and thus may have fundamentally different habitat suitability requirements (Lado et al.,).
Dermacentor ticks are receiving increasing attention as significant vectors of zoonotic pathogens, and there have been recent calls for closer monitoring of understudied species (Lippi et al.,; Martin et al.,). SDM offers a framework for rapidly estimating potential distributions of vectors when ample occurrence data are available. Yet, there are considerable ramifications that may arise if models are put into public health practice without thorough assessment (Erdemir et al.,). It is therefore necessary to periodically review estimates of risk as new data or methods become available. However, in this study, we found that an additional 9 years of passive surveillance data resulted in negligible differences in distribution estimates. This points to the benefit of augmenting existing surveillance to target undersampled areas, and highlights the need to expand pathogen testing capabilities to other existing networks.
We limited ourselves in our previous study (Lippi et al.,) to building models with tick occurrence data from the MilTICK surveillance program because our analysis hinged on knowing the infection status of each tick. Yet, future modeling efforts could include targeted surveillance datasets from additional locations, provided that analogous testing data for infection status are available. Widespread, county-level surveillance for D. variabilis in the United States is currently limited (Lehane et al.,). Pathogens with low detection rates may particularly benefit from targeted, active surveillance strategies to delineate risk. In this study, updated passive surveillance data yielded only 19 novel spatially unique records of infected ticks after thinning. To contrast, a recent study that targeted a discrete area in Northern Wisconsin, an area of low predicted suitability in our models, successfully detected R. montanensis in D. variabilis (Vincent and Hulstrand,). Focused testing efforts, particularly in locations bordering areas of range disagreement, may help resolve the limits of exposure risk and facilitate targeted monitoring efforts.
In conclusion, infected ticks are predicted to have a distribution that is a subset of the full vector range, a finding which is consistent across original and updated data inputs. For a generalist vector such as D. variabilis, ascertaining the key areas of pathogen exposure risk within such a large range of predicted suitability, is an important potential tool for future surveillance and monitoring. Revisiting the estimation of tick distributions is a necessary endeavor, particularly as we gain more information on tick-borne transmission cycles through surveillance and laboratory studies. There are few occurrence records that establish D. variabilis at the county level throughout our predicted suitability range in the contiguous United States, pointing to a general need for increased surveillance activities (Lehane et al.,). Yet, placing emphasis solely on new data collection for the refinement of spatial risk assessments may not yield dramatic gains in information. This is perhaps most evident in the passive surveillance of pathogens with low detection rates.
Additionally, we suggest that there is a great need to validate data in areas identified as high risk through active surveillance, particularly where passive surveillance is lacking. Moving forward, efforts to further refine geographic risk estimates of tick-borne pathogens will benefit from targeted surveillance to resolve distributional boundaries.
