Many studies have predicted future distributions of Aedes mosquitoes and risks of dengue, including regional- and global-level predictions, based on GCMs of different climate change scenarios. Since different models yield quite different results, it is difficult to assess the uncertainty of the predictions and to validate the modeling results. A study of climate change in the Arctic found that the actual increase in temperature from 1979 to 2021 was 4 times of that predicted by climate model, indicating the uncertainty of GCM predictions and the importance of observational data. To our knowledge, this is the first study to use actual observed climate trends to predict the future distribution of dengue risks worldwide. We found strong trends (measured by linear regression and correlation coefficient) in climate warming across nearly all meteorological observations in China, which makes our climate change predictions reliable if the current trend holds; the fixed annual change rates are similar to the assumptions for the climate models, but our predictions are supported by over 50 years of observations. We found that the temperature increased the most from February to April. We also found strong correlations between the prevalence of Ae. albopictus and observed winter to early spring temperature, the months with the greatest temperature increase, indicating that the warming temperature may have major impact on the northward expansion of the Ae. albopictus distribution. The projected temperatures in 2050 and 2080 in this study were approximately 1–1.5 °C higher than those projected by GCMs. Our model predicted that Ae. albopictus risk will expand to nearly all populated areas in China and the risk season will expand from June–September to April–October by 2050, likely due to the substantial increase in temperature from February to April. We estimated that the current population at risk of Ae. albopictus in China is approximately 960 million, or approximately 68% of the total population, and will reach 1.2 billion or approximately85% of the current population by 2050.
Dengue outbreaks in China have been reported in Shandong, Henan, and Chongqing provinces, which are not far from the current known northern Ae. albopictus distribution boundary, indicating that the risk of dengue outbreaks can reasonably be predicted by the distribution of the vector mosquito Ae. albopictus. Since Ae. albopictus is nearly the sole vector for recent dengue outbreaks in China, the observed dengue outbreaks in northern China also demonstrate the urgency for updated Ae. albopictus surveillance in northern China, which is currently not available. The increase in temperature in northern China warrants the need to use observed climate changes to examine the impact of these changes on dengue outbreak risks, both in China and worldwide. Given the wide distribution of imported dengue cases all over China, our study is a timely example of such an approach, and our results show the power of using observed meteorological records for predicting future dengue outbreak risks.
Incidentally, it is interesting to note that Aedes species other than Ae. albopictus have also been observed in China. The known major dengue vector Ae. aegypti has been reported in Yunnan in southwestern China bordering Myanmar, where dengue outbreaks have been reported. Ae. albopictus has also been reported in the same area. Our model predicted very high risk of dengue outbreaks in Yunnan Province nearly year-round in the China-Myanmar border area. Aedes vexans has been reported from Heilongjiang Province, a northeastern province bordering the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Russia and Mongolia, far north of the current Ae. albopictus northern boundary. In addition, Ae. caspius and Ae. flavidorsalis have been reported in central Qinghai Province, the core area of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Culex and Anopheles mosquitoes have also been reported in these places. The vector status of these Aedes mosquitoes is unknown, as is the impact of climate change on the distribution and vector status of these Aedes mosquitoes. Furthermore, Culex pipiens pipiens, Culex pipiens pallens, Culex pipiens quinquefasciatus and its hybrids have in recent years established populations in Lhasa city, Tibet Autonomous Region, 3700 m above sea level; whether they can transmit diseases is unknown. However, malaria and malaria vectors have been reported in Motuo County, Tibet, indicating the possibility of pathogen transmission at high altitudes, and climate change may enhance or support the transmission of pathogens in the highlands.
There are several limitations to this study. Although validation analysis showed that our model had high power to predict the observed presence of Ae. albopictus, the suitability model predicted the potential distribution of Ae. albopictus in the Taklamakan Desert area of southwestern Xinjiang in northwestern China, which is likely due to the lack of Ae. albopictus surveillance data and the sparse distribution of meteorological records in the area; the predicted future climate in this area was likely biased by the use of ground observations from other stations. In this context, mosquito surveillance should be enhanced by setting up more monitoring stations in western and northeastern China (see Fig. 1), and better surveillance coverage may improve the power of model predictions and capture the potentially newly invaded areas by Ae. albopictus in China. Some dengue risk models have used human population density as an independent risk predictor, which may reduce the uncertainty of model predictions; since the desert is a no-man’s land, the dengue risk will be zero. In this study, we used only climatic and environmental data; therefore, we only predicted the climate suitability for dengue transmission. On the other hand, the environmental variables already included humid, sub-humid, semiarid, and arid regions as an independent variables, so the predicted suitability in the desert area is likely due to the lack of Ae. albopictus surveillance data from arid areas. In addition, adding the human population as a variable may not have a major impact on the overall results, because population density is high in northeastern China but no Ae. albopictus has been detected in the area, likely due to the low temperature. Since future trends in climate change may not be the same as those in the last 50 years, we cannot necessarily assume a fixed trend, i.e., the prediction of future climate change has uncertainty. However, most if not all climate models use the fixed emission assumption over time, although they allow for different emissions scenarios. Since we used observed climatic data, the projected distribution of Ae. albopictus can be adjusted or the model calibrated when future data are updated; this may be a viable solution to address the uncertainty of future climate change. Finally, in addition to the uncertainty in future global climate change, future population growth in China is also uncertain especially by 2050 and beyond, recent birth/death records show a substantial downward trend in population growth in China. Since it is difficult to predict both the future population trend in China and population movement (thus population distribution), therefore there is an uncertainty for the prediction of future at-risk populations.
