The pathogenesis of HT is determined by a disturbed immune system, manifested by the accumulation of autoreactive lymphocytes and macrophages with the simultaneous loss of immune tolerance to one’s own tissues, which in turn leads to the destruction of the thyroid gland and the development of hypothyroidism. CD4+ T cells play a significant role in HT immunopathogenesis. When they get activated, they differentiate into different subtypes, depending on the cytokines released. By secreting interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), Th1 cells control macrophage-dependent cell-mediated immunity. Meanwhile, Th2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5, or IL-10 and regulate B cell responses. IL-12 is crucial for activating Th1 responses, while IL-6 promotes the IL-4-dependent induction of Th2 differentiation. In addition, CD8+ T cells may cause thyrocyte destruction through the Fas–FasL pathway or perforin and granzymes. Suppression of T cell responses could play a clinical role in the development and course of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, even at the stage of full progression of the disease, because the thyroid tissue of HT patients is infiltrated by CD69+ and CD25+, with moderate numbers of Foxp3+ cells. In addition, the number and function of peripheral Tregs decrease, indicating that suppression of the T cell response is still clinically crucial at the stage of full progression of the disease.
The effect of NS on T cells in patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis has not been studied so far. However, Farhangi et al. showed that supplementation with powdered NS significantly reduces serum TSH and TPO-Ab concentrations in HT patients. Therefore, we decided to analyze the influence of NSEO on some essential properties of T cells from HT patients. We focused on examining T cells’ proliferation capacity, susceptibility to apoptosis and necrosis, and ability to produce cytokines. To do that, we prepared an experimental model in which human PBMCs from healthy women and HT patients were preactivated by 24 h stimulation with an immobilized monoclonal anti-CD3 antibody. Next, different NSEO dilution variants were added to the cell culture. The purpose of such an experimental protocol was to mimic in vivo conditions in HT patients, where lymphocytes are continuously activated upon contact with an autoantigen. The incredible advantage of this model was the use of PBMCs, which are a mixture of different cells; in addition to T cells, there are also B cells, dendritic cells (DCs), and monocytes. In HT, the role of not only T cells but also of other cells that participate in the presentation of autogens and stimulate antibody production is essential.
Our findings showed that the proliferation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from healthy women and HT patients is significantly inhibited mainly in the presence of the lowest (1:10) NSEO dilution; the number of cell divisions reduced, and the percentage of dividing cells decreased. In our previous work, we used a different stimulation protocol in which NSEO was added simultaneously with anti-CD3 antibody, which resulted in a much more significant reduction in the percentage of proliferating T cells from healthy people, observed even at higher NSEO dilutions (1:50 and 1:100). Thus, adding NSEO before stimulation has a much stronger effect, probably due to the inhibition of T cell activation through the TCR/CD3 complex. Meanwhile, the effect of NSEO on previously activated T cells is weaker due to earlier activation of specific signaling pathways essential for their function.
Our results would explain the observation made by Kheirouri et al., who demonstrated that oral supplementation with NS oil decreases the percentage of blood CD8+ T cells in RA patients. It could also explain a reduction in RA symptoms after oral NS supplementation. Similar observations were made in other immune-related diseases; symptoms reduced after consuming NS seeds or oil in patients with asthma and allergic rhinitis. The common feature of these diseases is the malfunction of CD4+ T cells, which react to antigens that usually do not cause any reaction in healthy people (allergens) or autoantigens present in the body and then induce a response of CD8+ T cells and B cells.
A reduction in the percentage of proliferating T cells in the presence of 1:10 NSEO dilution in cell culture was related to intensified cell apoptosis and necrosis. Cell death was also induced in the presence of 1:50 NSEO. Similar effects were seen in HT patients and healthy women. Similar cytotoxic activity was also observed for methanolic NS seed extract in human lymphoma U937 cells, SiHa human cervical cancer cells, and MCF- 7 breast cancer cells. NS inhibited cell proliferation and stimulated apoptosis by activating p53 and caspases. However, there are some papers describing the protective effect of NS. For instance, Tripathi and Pandey showed that the methanolic extract from NS seeds protects human lymphocytes stimulated with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) from apoptosis. Salem et al. showed that NS oil increases the numbers of CD4+ T cells but not CD8+ T cells in mice.
It has been suggested that thymoquinone could be the primary bioactive constituent of NSEO as it induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis of leukemic cell lines through the Bax pathway. Another proposed active compound is α-hederin, which causes the formation of membrane pores and changes in the cell membrane, including vacuolization of the cytoplasm, leading to cell death in cultures of cancerous (melanoma) and non-cancerous mouse 3T fibroblast cells. However, essential oils of plants are a mixture of volatile substances of different natures and complex chemical compositions. Their rich chemical composition determines their multidirectional biological activity. As substances with high lipophilicity, they easily penetrate the cell wall and membranes of various microorganisms, disrupting the integrity of these structures. One of the proposed mechanisms of toxicity against cells of EOs or their terpenoid components is the coagulation of the cytoplasm and, above all, the permeabilization of the cell membrane, which causes excessive loss of ions, which consequently lowers the membrane potential, disrupting the functioning of proton pumps and the associated reduction in the pool of intracellular ATP.
In Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, the immune response of Th1 lymphocytes predominates, which, together with macrophages, produce mainly pro-inflammatory cytokines, including INF-γ, TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6. This mechanism activates the apoptosis of thyroid cells through FasL co-expressed on the cell surface. In our study, we observed that cells from HT patients produced high levels of IL-10, TNF, IFN-γ, and IL-17A after stimulation with anti-CD3 antibody alone. Most of the listed cytokines are involved in developing Th1 and Th17 responses. While the immunopathogenesis of HT is mainly associated with excessive activity of Th1 cells and CTLs, it has been shown that HT patients have increased levels of circulating Th17 cells and that Th17 cells are found in the thyroid gland. IL-17, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, induces the production of other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and IL-6. An increase in the same cytokines was also observed in healthy women in this study, indicating a strong activation of Th1 and Th17 responses under culture conditions.
Our results also demonstrated that Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells do not produce cytokine synchronously, regardless of health status. The dynamics of cytokine secretion vary, which explains why IL-10, TNF, IL-6, IFN-γ, and IL-17A increased in cell culture supernatants after 72 h of stimulation with anti-CD3 antibody alone, while IL-2 and IL-4 were low. The secretion of IL-2 is a critical and early event in the activation program of T cells. The production of this critical cytokine is subject to multifactorial regulation at the level of chromatin remodeling, transcription, message stability, and possibly even translation. In vivo studies using animal models have demonstrated that the transcript can be detected in naive T cells as early as 1 h after stimulation and peaks at 4–6 h. However, maximal intracellular accumulation of the protein in vivo has been reported to take as long as 12–14 h. Next, IL-2 production terminates quickly, and secretion is undetectable by 20–24 h in either cell type. This explains why IL-2 in the supernatants was low after anti-CD3 antibody stimulation in HT patients and healthy women in this study. Studies show that the secretion of IL-4 is generally low compared to IFN or IL-17, which we also saw in our model.
Noteworthy was the significant decrease in IL-17A production in the presence of the broad spectrum of NSEO dilutions in HT patients and healthy women. It was recently shown in a mouse model that B cells induce the activation of Th17 cells, and these cells are inhibited by brodalumab in the treatment of various autoimmune diseases, such as systemic sclerosis. In our study model, among PBMCs, B cells were found. From our observations, B cell proliferation is also inhibited in the presence of NSEO. Therefore, they probably contribute to IL-17A secretion in both healthy women and HT patients.
In healthy women, the presence of 1:10 and 1:50 NSEO dilutions in cell culture stimulated the release of IL-2 and IL-4 into cell culture supernatants. In HT patients, the concentration of IL-4 was higher in the presence of 1:50 NSEO, without affecting the IL-2 levels. These results could suggest that NSEO shifts the T cell response toward Th2, as evidenced by the increased IL-4 levels. Barlianto et al. obtained the opposite effect while examining the effect of NS oil supplementation in children with asthma. The authors demonstrated that 8 weeks of NS oil supplementation increases serum IFN-γ levels and reduces IL-4 levels, thus redirecting the T cell response toward Th1. The discrepancy in the results may be because HT is dominated by the Th1 response, which under the influence of NSEO is redirected toward Th2. Meanwhile, in asthma, the Th2 response is dominant, which under the influence of NS may have been redirected toward Th1, proving the immunomodulatory properties of NSEO. However, it should be emphasized that the authors analyzed serum cytokine levels after NS oil supplementation, while we assessed the effect of NSEO in vitro. Therefore, it seems more likely that the release of IL-2 and IL-4 into cell culture supernatants resulted from the cytotoxic effect of NSEO on lymphocytes in the tested dilutions.
Still, the phenomenon cannot be only explained by intensified cell death because some cytokines (e.g., IFN-γ, IL-6) were unaffected by NSEO and some (e.g., IL-17A) decreased in the broad spectrum of NSEO dilutions, even those that did not cause apoptosis. In addition, the sensitivity of cells to NSEO was also dependent on health status. For example, TNF was not significantly affected by NSEO in healthy women, while it decreased in the presence of 1:10 and 1:100 NSEO dilutions in HT patients. In contrast, IL-10 decreased in the presence of 1:10–1:100 NSEO dilutions in healthy women, but in HT patients, it remained unaffected.
