Typically, 25%-45% of schwannomas occur in the head and neck region and are most common between the second and fifth decade of life. The majority of schwannomas in this region are reported to occur in the parapharyngeal spaces. Most schwannomas are sporadic, while rare cases can be associated with neurofibromatosis type I or II. An estimated 50% of parapharyngeal schwannomas originate from the vagus nerve, with the next most common site being the cervical sympathetic chain. Pediatric schwannomas are rare and account for less than 10% of all schwannomas. There is only one published case report by Zhu et al. documenting a pharyngeal schwannoma in a pediatric patient, which originated from the posterior oropharyngeal wall and measured 2.5 cm in size. Our report represents the first published case of a pediatric patient with a schwannoma arising from the lateral wall of the nasopharynx and measuring greater than 5 cm in maximum dimension.
Schwannomas of the head and neck region often present as asymptomatic grossly visible masses or with localized obstructive symptoms such as dysphagia, globus sensation, voice changes, or difficulty breathing. Patients often delay presentation for care for many months, and initial misdiagnosis commonly leads to further delay in treatment. As in this case, nonspecific symptoms were mistaken for a routine infection by the emergency department providers and led to a misdiagnosis and delay in definitive management. An otolaryngology consultation at the time of this patient's initial presentation may have prompted an earlier diagnosis. The otolaryngologist's expertise in the head and neck exam as well as an earlier referral for head and neck imaging would have been helpful in expanding the clinical workup of this patient's complaints.
Many clinicians report that schwannoma is not in their initial differential diagnosis when they evaluate an intraoral or pharyngeal tumor. Intraoral schwannomas are most often mistaken for other mesenchymal tumors or epithelial tumors. Several conditions that are important to consider when evaluating a mass in the pharynx include a salivary gland tumor, neurofibroma, paraganglioma, hairy polyp, or other neurogenic or malignant tumor . Diagnosis of head and neck schwannomas usually includes imaging and pathological evaluation to differentiate them from other possible tumors. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used initially to inform clinical decision-making and can be expected to show well-circumscribed soft tissue lesions.
Surgical excision is the standard treatment for schwannomas, and there is typically a low rate of recurrence or complications. Although the nerve of origin is rarely identified, excision without nerve isolation has been shown to be safe with a low risk of neurologic complications. The fibrous capsule and hypovascularity typical of schwannomas aid in safe excision, although surgery can be more complex depending on tumor location. The definitive diagnosis of schwannomas relies on post-excision histopathological analysis. The diagnosis is confirmed with microscopic examination demonstrating Antoni A and B areas and Verocay bodies along with expression of S100 on immunohistochemistry stains.
