Previous studies have suggested that VLPs can act as strong immunogens and can even can be exploited as carriers for target epitopes. VLPs mimic the actual size and shape of native viruses and can mediate both humoral and cell-mediated immunity. Because of their similarity to native viruses, VLPs are efficiently recognised by professional antigen presenting cells (APCs). The exposure of target antigens on the VLP surface allows antigen delivery and presentation to T and B cells, since the VLPs act as a delivery platform and an adjuvant at the same time. After the uptake of VLPs by APCs, they present the target antigens to naive T cells and initiate target-specific immune responses. However, it is important to select the appropriate conditions for a regular VLP assembly in order to get native-like particles, as their structural characteristics may impact their antigenic properties.
We demonstrated the high immunogenicity of different recombinant VLPs derived from the major capsid protein VP1 of nine HPyVs. Our data links with previous immunogenicity studies in humans or animals either naturally infected with PyVs or immunised with VLPs. The seroprevalence study of 14 HPyVs showed that antibodies against these viruses are detected in the human population, demonstrating that all these viruses are recognised by the human immune system. Other studies demonstrated that BKPyV is able to induce IgG responses in infected individuals, and some other HPyVs are recognised by the immune system and induce humoral and cellular immune responses in humans. On the other hand, some PyVs, such as SV40, can evade the immune system of the host. The study on the immunogenicity of MuPyV VP1 VLPs in mouse models also demonstrated that these VLPs induced strong humoral and cellular immune responses. In addition, our results show the impact of VLP size on humoral immune response, as larger VLPs induced a higher response. The differences in the humoral immune response could also be related to different amino acid sequences on the surface of VLPs that determine the exposure of different VLP epitopes to B lymphocytes.
Until now, only one or a few VP1 VLPs derived from different HPyVs were investigated within the same experimental setting. The uptake of PyV VP1-derived VLPs by the cells was also shown. In contrast to previous studies, we demonstrated the uptake of VP1 VLPs derived from nine HPyVs by primary mouse macrophages. Previous studies suggest that PyVs enter the cells via endocytosis after VP1 protein binding to sialic acid-containing cellular receptors. It was also demonstrated that PyV-derived recombinant VLPs are taken up by the cells in a comparable way as native viruses. For instance, VP1 VLPs of HaPyV were taken up by the dendritic cells and induced their activation. Another example shows that VP1 VLPs of BK and JC PyVs were taken up by non-professional phagocytes—liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. The uptake of VLPs by the cells is a fast process. For example, VP1 VLPs of the murine pneumotropic virus were significantly internalised within 10 min, and in 40 min a 50% uptake of these VLPs were detected in a murine endothelial cell line. After endocytosis, VLPs were transferred to the cell nucleus by their nuclear localisation signal allocated in the N-terminal region of VP1 protein, as was demonstrated with VLPs of JCPyV using HeLa and SVG human cell lines. We showed that HPyVs VLPs are recognised by both humoral and innate immune systems, suggesting that HPyVs itself might be immunogenic.
Certain PyVs are declared to be zoonotic, thus, we made a cross-reactivity analysis of different human, mammalian and avian PyV VP1 VLPs to identify possible antigenic differences between investigated PyVs. First, we made the phylogenetic tree of VP1 amino acid sequences of all VP1 VLPs used in this study. We set five distinct groups combining human, mammalian and avian PyVs VP1. Our cross-reactivity analysis of VP1 VLP-specific antisera was in agreement with the VP1 based PyV phylogenetic tree; however, a high intergroup cross-reactivity was also observed. It was previously shown that mouse polyclonal antibodies raised using HPyV VP1 VLPs are able to recognize other HPyVs VP1 proteins in western blot analysis, but it was a bit different from our data. It should be noted that, in this study, the antibodies were raised against the surface-exposed parts of VLPs, while the phylogenetic analysis is based on the comparison of the primary structure of VP1 proteins, which might cause some of the differences between phylogenetic and experimental data of antiserum cross-reactivity. We also found differences between other studies investigating VP1 amino acid sequences. For example, SaraPyV was shown to be similar to MCPyV, TSPyV, and HPyV9, while our cross-reactivity data evince SaraPyV’s similarity to MCPyV, HPyV6, and STLPyV. These discrepancies could be due to different analysis methods, as we assess epitopes in the spatial structure of VP1, not just the amino acid sequence. It is likely that the structural antigenic comparison represents biological evidence of PyVs properties, especially when VLPs structures seem to be comparable to native viruses.
Recombinant VP1 VLPs of PyVs are extensively exploited as a promising tool for various biomedical applications. They are used for the investigation of PyV seroepidemiology, as they are excellent antigens in ELISA platforms to determine PyV-specific antibodies. Due to their repetitive structure and large size, VP1 VLPs of PyVs are highly immunogenic and can be used as carriers or as a delivery platform for the presentation of heterologous antigens in vaccine development. These VLPs might be used to develop vaccines without additional adjuvants because PyV-derived VLPs are able to activate pattern-recognition receptors, thereby enhancing the immune response. Technologies for constructing chimeric and pseudotype PyV-derived VLPs allow for the insertion of antigens of different sizes and origins into VLPs, which is a valuable approach for studies of non-immunogenic or difficult-to-express proteins. On the other hand, PyV-derived chimeric VLPs harbouring other viral antigens as targets can be used to investigate the interaction at the cellular level between the target antigens and the host, for example, their binding with cell receptors and the mechanisms of virus uptake by the cells. Our study provides additional information about the immonogenicity of HPyVs VP1-derived VLPs, demonstrating their ability to induce immune response depending on their size, amino acid sequences, and other structural features.
Despite the many studies on PyV epidemiology and data about their presence in patients with certain diseases, there are insufficient data on the biology of these viruses and how the immune system combats them. Some HPyVs are dangerous; their activity might be disastrous to immunocompromised patients. For example, JCPyV and BKPyV cause renal allograft failure after renal transplantation, and there is no effective treatment for this life-threatening condition. Another example is skin diseases induced by HPyVs—MCPyV, TSPyV, HPyV7 and HPyV6. MCPyV stands out as an aggressive cancer-causing virus. HPyV6 and HPyV7 are primarily associated with inflammatory skin diseases such as psoriasis. Though some previous studies suggest that PyVs induce strong immune responses both at humoral and cellular levels, more investigations are needed on the interaction of PyVs with the host immune system and on PyV-driven molecular mechanisms to evade the immune responses, especially due to the fact that most individuals are infected with PyVs in their childhood, as highlighted by the recent study in Greece. Understanding the risk factors for developing a severe PyV-caused disease is of high importance, as there is no specific treatment for PyV infection. The current treatments based on using neutralising antibodies or immunotherapy are not efficient sufficient and have side effects, highlighting the need for more studies in this field.
In this study we also generated a collection of MAbs of various specificities to HPyVs. This tool can be used for PyVs detection and characterisation. Generated VP1 specific MAbs could be applied for assays to detect the native viruses in cell cultures or tissues. MAbs’ specificity to a certain epitope may also be used to investigate the structure of viral particles and interactions between those particles and host cell receptors.
In sum, in this study we compared a number of VLPs composed of recombinant VP1 proteins of different human, mammalian and avian PyVs in regard to their immunogenicity, antigenic similarity, and their uptake by professional APCs. We demonstrated that despite the different size and some distinctions of immunogenicity levels, all nine studied HPyV derived VP1 VLPs were immunogenic in a mouse model and induced IgG formation. They were also taken up by mouse macrophages, suggesting the subsequent presentation of VLP-derived antigens for inducing a cell-mediated response. Antibodies raised against certain VP1 VLPs of HPyVs cross-reacted with VLPs of other human and animal PyVs. The pattern of cross-reactivity indicates the high antigenic similarity of PyV VP1 proteins, and is in agreement with their phylogenetic analysis based on the sequence of VP1 proteins. Furthermore, as the humoral immune response to PyVs is mainly related to VP1, the cross-reactivity levels between VP1 proteins may suggest possible cross-immunity to several PyVs after encountering one of them. More investigations are needed on the role and mechanisms of immune protection against severe diseases caused by different PyVs. In conclusion, our study and the developed molecular tools reveal the antigenic features of PyVs and provide the means for further studies of PyV biology.
