Although improved therapy options with increased interdisciplinary approaches for patients with HCC have been implemented in the last decades, liver resection remains the first option for patients with early disease stage and preserved liver function. However, liver resection in HCC which is usually accompanied by liver cirrhosis and other co-morbidities requires a notable amount of medical resources ranging from surgical theater to intensive care unit and normal ward capacities. Due to the recent COVID pandemic, medical resources were sparse not only in western countries, but across the globe and usually shifted to treat COVID. Therefore, we investigated the role of TTS in surgically resected HCC patients. Within a large European cohort, we demonstrated that TTS was no risk factor for reduced RFS and OS in HCC patients undergoing curative-intent surgery. Interestingly, we also could not identify major differences in perioperative characteristics of patients with different TTS intervals in our analysis. Furthermore, we determined age, ASA score, preoperative INR, multifocal disease, largest nodule diameter, MVI, and postoperative complications as independent prognostic factors of OS and INR, multifocal disease, and MVI as independent prognostic factors of RFS.
The currently available literature reveals conflicting results regarding the influence of TTS in HCC. While in a retrospective monocentric study by Signal et al. a worse survival due to delayed TTS was observed, a more recent multicentric study of Rao et al. showed no statistical significance of a treatment delay above 90 days on OS of HCC patients. Of note, both studies were not focused on surgically treated patients and included locoregional and systemic therapies across a large disease spectrum. In the cohort of Rao et al., only 31.3% were treated by liver resection, while in the publication of Signal et al. 28% of all patients did undergo surgery demonstrating a limited view on patients with early-stage HCC. Another large study by Govalan et al. demonstrated no association between delay in treatment for HCC and worse OS according to the data of 100,000 patients. Although 38% of the included patients were treated with liver resection, non-curative modalities were also included in this investigation. While profiting from a large dataset, these multicenter datasets do only include a limited number of preoperative characteristics especially detailed tumor staging with associated risk factors, e.g., tumor spread and vascular invasion as well an undetailed view on patients’ performance. Thus, to the best of our knowledge, our study is the first report focusing on TTS in a cohort of surgical patients.
Interestingly, a large systematic review demonstrated a worsened OS after each 4 weeks of delay to definitive surgery in bladder, breast, colon, and head/neck cancer. Regarding other carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract, a 2020 published study showed an improved OS in pancreatic adenocarcinoma if surgery was conducted within 6 weeks after time of diagnose. For gastric cancer on the other hand, a prolonged time to surgery seems to have no effect on OS according to a recent study. In the case of colorectal liver metastasis undergoing liver resection, a larger monocentric retrospective study displayed a worse OS for patients undergoing liver resection with a time to surgery longer than 6 months. Of note, a part of this cohort underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy, whereas in our study, patients with any preoperative treatment were excluded to reduce bias in the cohort. Given these different findings for common visceral cancers, it is debatable to shift focus to tumors which are more prone to TTS-related effects due to their inherent malignant potential.
Interestingly, the median TTS was significantly higher during the COVID pandemic compared to the time interval before the COVID pandemic exemplifying the aforementioned shift in medical resources also in our university hospital. As TTS was not associated with OS or RFS in our analysis, it is assumable that this specific delay might not have an influence on long-term outcome. However, this research question must be readdressed and studied in detail after a sufficient follow-up time for these recent patients.
In some circumstances, emergency surgery for HCC is necessary, e.g., because of acute tumor bleeding. Subsequently, these cases were also excluded from our analysis. However, in any other scenario, it seems debatable to delay TTS in the surgical candidates to preoperatively improve the performance status as our results suggest that this might not necessarily impair long-term oncological results. Moreover, in our cohort, a notable part of patients was assessed as ASA > III (65%, 141/217). Moreover, ASA score and postoperative complications were determined as independent factors for reduced OS as also demonstrated in other studies. Thus, using the TTS to improve the patient’s condition prior to surgery appears reasonable. Prehabiliation is a health care intervention prior to surgery comprising lifestyle changes and training resulting in improved nutritional status and physical and mental fitness in the form of a multimodal and usually multidisciplinary concept. Previous meta-analyses already demonstrated reduced hospitalization and complication rates in patients undergoing prehabilitation prior to major abdominal surgery. Prehabilitation strategies include the improvement of aerobic fitness and body composition by physical therapy and correction of malnutrition by professional nutrition interventions as well as reduction of alcohol consumption, support for smoking cessation, and medical interventions to correct anemia as well as psychological support to improve preoperative anxiety, depression, and low self-efficacy. With healthcare funding being a hotly debated subject in western society, structured prehabiliation programs have not widely been implemented. From a cost efficiency perspective, prehabiliation might not be implemented en masse but in selected patients benefiting most from preoperative exercise. Given our data, as well as the high prevalence of sarcopenia in HCC and liver cirrhosis, HCC patients might be ideal candidates for structured prehabiliation programs, which is currently also enforced in our department.
Besides our primary observation regarding the oncological influence in HCC, we identified several prognostic factors in our cohort which are in line with the literature and indicate comparability of our data to other datasets. MVI has been identified as an important histological parameter and limitational factor for OS and RFS after liver resection and transplantation before. Although examination of suitable preoperative MVI prediction models is becoming more popular in recent years, postoperative histopathological examination currently seems to be the only valid option for proving MVI in HCC at current state. Further we could identify the number of nodules as independent predictor for OS as also commonly known risk factor for reduced OS. Interestingly, number of nodules as preoperative imaging parameter was described as prognostic preoperative imaging markers for appearance of MVI recently. INR has been identified as independent predictor for OS and RFS in our cohort which was also demonstrated in previous studies. Of note, all independent prognostic variables as defined by our multivariable models associated with OS and RFS were not different in the grouped analysis regarding TTS in our patients underlining the validity our results.
As with all retrospective analyses, our study has certainly limitations having to be considered when interpreting the results. Within the monocentric setting of our study, the data reflects the authors’ individual approach to HCC which might be different to clinical standards of other hepatobiliary centers. Also, due to etiological differences, our implications might not be transferable to Asian patients. While the focus of our study was to investigate the influence of TTS in surgically treated patients, we are not able to report on patients dropping from surgical treatment plans due to progression during waiting time as only a small subset of patients was diagnosed in our hepatobiliary center and most of the TTS interval was based on the time from diagnosis to initially presentation to our hepatobiliary unit and not on the waiting time for surgery. However, as HCC is usually slowly progressing which does also explain our findings, it is assumable that the proportion of patients showing a significant disease progression precluding surgical treatment during waiting time might be low. Of note, especially OS appeared numerically higher in patients with short TTS (1–30 days) compared to patients with longer TTS intervals but did not show statistical significance (p=0.602). It is debatable whether a statistically significant benefit would be detectable in a larger data set. However, generic cox regression gave no indication for a relevant effect of a shorter TTS and the better result was not replicable in the RFS analysis. Nevertheless, as with all monocentric analysis, our results warrant further investigations in larger, multicentric data sets.
